---
layout: post
title: Hacking the OWON SDS7102 Scope
tags:
- nerdy stuff
id: 20c21172-d719-4e7e-84b9-248bb9c2dff5
---

A few years ago I bought myself an [OWON SDS7102
oscilloscope](http://www.owon.com.hk/products_info.asp?ProID=172).

![Scope]({{site.baseurl}}/images/2016-05-01-sds7102-hacking/scope.jpg)

The specifications for the scope are rather nice: decent bandwidth and
sampling rates, a large bright display, a battery option and lots of
connectivity such as a USB host, USB device and Ethernet.  The scope
is pretty crappy in some ways though.  The analog section is fairly
noisy so don't expect to see any details for signals below 1mV at X10
attenuation.  The firmware is a bit buggy and some things just don't
work.  Trying to save images to a USB memory hangs until the USB
memory is unplugged.  Trying to talk to the scope over ethernet
crashes the scope.  The menu system is a bit messy.

(I know, the reason the USB memories won't work is that the sector
size is wrong.  I'd still consider that a big wart since there are no
error messages and this information isn't that easy to find.)

Still, it has been very useful.  I have a much fancier, and of course
much more expensive, Hameg scope at the office.  The Hameg has a
better analog section, the noise is noticeably lower than with the
OWON, it has a higher sampling rate, can decode a bunch of different
protocols, has a logic analyzer, and has more math functions than I
can shake a soldering iron at and is just better in so many ways.
It's a solid piece of German engineering.  But engineers aren't always
that good at user interfaces so it's also a bit clunky to use.

Most of the I need an oscilloscope because I'm looking at something
like an I2C bus or a SPI bus and for that it doesn't really matter if
the measurements are a bit noisy down a 10mV and I don't need that
high sampling rates.  The large display and the fact that the all the
knobs and buttons are in the natural places makes the OWON really nice
to use.  The OWON also fits perfectly in an old laptop bag I have, and
since it cheap enough that I'm not too worried about breaking when I'm
carrying it around.  If would manage to break it I can afford a new
one.  Being able to run the scope off the battery is also a real plus
in some situations.  Despite all its fault the OWON has somehow ended
up being up the scope I use most of the time.

The "hacking" part
==================

One of the reasons I bought this specific scope was that I had seen
some teardowns of it and knew that the scope has a Samsung
System-on-Chip (SoC) and a Spartan 6 FPGA in it and I have some
familiarity with both.  At the back of my head I had the idea that I
might be able to reverse engineer the scope and do something
interesting with it.

Two years after buying the scope I still hadn't done anything like
that with it though.  But about a week ago I finally decided to do
something.

A word of warning here.  This is probably going to be yet another
project where I start, spend some time on it and then lose interest,
so there's a big risk that I won't reach my goal.  But the road there
might be interesting anyway.

What is reverse engineering?
============================

Figuring out how something like this works is called "reverse
engineering", the idea is that you are looking at a finished product
that someone has build and you are trying to reverse the engineering
process that went into designing the thing.

There is a huge thread discussing the [SDS7102 on EEVblog
forums](http://www.eevblog.com/forum/testgear/review-of-owon-sds7102/)
and other people has done quite a bit of reverse engineering of it
already.  They have mostly concentrated on the analog parts and I'm
more interested in the digital parts and the firmware.

Disassembling the scope
=======================

The first thing to do is usually to open up the thing you're
interested in and try to identify the main components.  I opened up my
scope and started removing parts until I found the main board which
contains all the smarts.

The next step was to try to identify the main components on the board
and get a general feel for how they work together.

Components on the front
=======================

This is the side of the main board that's facing the front of the
scope.

![Front of main board]({{site.baseurl}}/images/2016-05-01-sds7102-hacking/sds-mainboard-front.jpg)

The connector to the LCD board is in the upper left corner and the
connector to a separate board with all the knobs and buttons is in the
top right corner.  The square component at the top has "Chrontel
7026B-TF" printed on it and a quick internet search confirms that it
is a "7026B TV/VGA Encoder" from the company Chrontel.  Other than
that there's not much interesting to see here.  All the good stuff of
the analog frontend (AFE) is hidden beneath a shield that I would
prefer to not remove if I can avoid it.  Someone called "tinhead" on
the EEVblog forums has already [reverse engineered the
AFE](http://www.eevblog.com/forum/testgear/review-of-owon-sds7102/msg65573/#msg65573)
so hopefully I won't have to do it.

Components on the back
=======================

I'm more interested in the digital parts and the back of the main
board has a lot more of that.

![Back of main board]({{site.baseurl}}/images/2016-05-01-sds7102-hacking/sds-mainboard-back.jpg)

The square component at the top is the Samsung S3C2416 SoC.  To the
left of the CPU is metal can which has 12.0000M printed on it.  A
metal can like this is almost always a crystal, so it ought to be the
main 12MHz crystal for the SoC.  The component to the right of the SoC
has Samsung K9F1G08U0C printed on it and and quick internet search
tells me this is a 128Mx8bit NAND flash memory.  From the
traces that are visible on the PCB it looks like it's connected to the
SoC, and this makes sense too since the SoC will need something to
load its firmware from.  The component below the SoC is a Hynix
H5PS5162GFR 64Mx16bit DDR2 memory and the traces also go to the SoC.
This also makes sense since the CPU needs memory to run the firmware
in.  So far so good.

The chip below and right of the SoC is the Xilinx Spartan&nbsp;6
XC6SLX9 FPGA.  The component above the FPGA turns out to be one more
Hynix DDR2 memory.  From looking at the traces that are visible on the
PCB it seems to be connected to the FPGA so this is probably used for
the waveform storage.  The FPGA has a lot of traces to the big
component below it which has a National Semiconductor logo and
"VE206ABE3" and "S7002952".  A search on these two doesn't show up
anything, but after digging a bit more it turns out that it ought
to be an ADC08D500 8 bit A/D-converter (ADC) which can sample two
channels at 500Msamples/second or one channel at 1Gsamples/second.
This matches the specifications for the scope and also makes sense.
Two differential pairs of traces sneak down below the shield and ought
to be ADC inputs from the AFE.

To the left of the the ADC is a component marked ADF and 4360-7, it's
an Analog Devices ADF4370-7 "350 to 1800MHz Integrated synthesizer and
VCO".  The component above and to the left of is marked with
"0.100000" and "DCP1311 1315".  I haven't been able to find any more
information about it, but I would guess that it's a crystal oscillator
of some kind which is used as a reference for the ADF4360 clock
synthesizer.

Close to the ethernet connector there's a Micrel KSZ8851 Single port
Ethernet MAC/PHY.  Next to it is a metal can which is marked L25.000M
and there are two traces from the can to the oscillator pins of the
KSZ8851.  25MHz is a very common frequency used for ethernet chips so
it's obviously the crystal for the it.

Finally there's a component marked AT88SC 0401CA which I couldn't find
a perfect match for but which is probably an Atmel "CryptoMemory"
which is probably used for copy protection, a way of storing and
verifying the serial number of the unit.

Pin headers
===========

The most interesting thing isn't any of the components though.  It is
what isn't mounted on the PCB.  Quite often parts that haven't been
mounted are things that are used during software development but
aren't needed when the units are mass produced such as connectors for
a serial port for debug messages or a JTAG programmer which can be
used to load and debug software.

Above the Samsung SoC there are four holes for a pin header which
could a serial ports.  In the top left corner there are ten more pins
for a pin header which is probably for a JTAG programmer.  There are
another three holes between the VGA and USB B connector which could be
yet another serial port.

Summary
=======

It was time to call it a day.  I had identified the most important
components on the main board and have a pretty decent idea of how they
are connected.  The empty pin headers might give me access to a
bootloader or allow me to connect a JTAG programmer so that I can look
at the existing firmware or load my own firmware into the SoC.

What is nice is that a lot things in the scope such as DDR memory,
NAND flash, LCD, USB host, USB device and serial ports are connected
interfaces that are built into the SoC; there aren't that may ways
they can be wired up.  The connections between the SoC and the DDR
memory or the NAND flash must be made in a specific way, otherwise
they won't work at all.  It ought to be fairly easy to make them work.

The ethernet controller is external though, but the pins of the IC are
exposed so it should be fairly easy to probe them and figure out how
they are connected to the SoC.  The thing that worries me is that both
the SoC and the FPGA and the DDR memory connected to the FPGA are all
BGA packages with no exposed pins; figuring out the connections
between them might be impossible.

It's hard to know when to quit
==============================

Before packing up I just had to try something first.  I tried probing the
four pins above the SoC.  No luck, they don't seem to do anything.

I had more success with the three holes next to the VGA port.  The
center pin turned out to be ground and the other pins are transmit and
receive of a serial port.

![Serial port]({{site.baseurl}}/images/2016-05-01-sds7102-hacking/serial-port.jpg)

When I connected a USB-serial adapter those pins, set my terminal
program to 115200 bps and powered on the oscilloscope I got the
following output:

    ******************************
    LILLIPUT
    DSO TARGEY BOARD VER 1.0
    LILLIPUT

    SamSung MCU S3C2440
    Program Ver 1.0(2006613)
     FCLK = 400000000Hz,  USB Crystal Type : 12M
    ****************************
    *          LOADBOOT        *
    *                          *
    *          LILLIPUT        *
    *           (2004)         *
    ****************************
    Boot to load (Y/N)?
    Wait for Enter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    DSO TARGEY BOARD VER 1.0

Lilliput is the company that owns the OWON brand.

Neat, that's something to play around with the next time.
