---
layout: post
title: Hacking the OWON SDS7102 Scope (Part 2)
tags:
- nerdy stuff
id: 8287d9eb-52aa-4156-bbcc-feeea65c0b44
---

In my [previous
post]({{site.baseurl}}/2016/05/01/sds7102-hacking.html) I had
disassembled my OWON SDS7102 scope and had just been able to locate a
debug serial port where I could see some messages from a bootloader.

    ******************************
    LILLIPUT
    DSO TARGEY BOARD VER 1.0
    LILLIPUT

    SamSung MCU S3C2440
    Program Ver 1.0(2006613)
     FCLK = 400000000Hz,  USB Crystal Type : 12M
    ****************************
    *          LOADBOOT        *
    *                          *
    *          LILLIPUT        *
    *           (2004)         *
    ****************************
    Boot to load (Y/N)?
    Wait for Enter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    DSO TARGEY BOARD VER 1.0

That looked very promising.  But nothing happened when i pressed Y or
Enter, the bootloader would just continue and load the oscilloscope
firmware.  I finally gave up on the serial port and started looking
for a JTAG port.

I later disassembled the bootloader and discovered that it listens for
the character "u" and this makes the bootloader stop and wait for a
connection over USB.  As far as I can tell there are no other
characters or magic phrases that makes it do something else.  I did
find code in the disassembly for some kind of command prompt but I
haven't figured out how to access it.  The command prompt might have
been disabled permanently even though there are traces left of it in
the code.

JTAG
====

[JTAG](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JTAG) is an acronym for Joint
Test Action Group which was originally a standard for testing
assembled PCB.  Using something called Boundary Scan it is possible to
control all the I/O pins of an IC and this can be used to to verify
that all the pins of an IC are connected correctly.  For ICs with a
built in processor, such as the ARM CPU in the Samsung S3C2416, it can
provide a debug interface to the procesor.

The mandatory pins for a JTAG port are Test Clock (TCK), Test Mode
Select (TMS), Test Data In (TDI), and Test Data Out (TDO).  Optional
pins are Test Reset (TRST) which is used to reset the JTAG interface
itself or System Reset (SRST) which is the reset for the whole system.
It's also good practice to have a voltage reference (VREF) pin with
the voltage that should be used to drive all the other pins.  It's of
course also necessary to have a ground (GND) pin.

This makes about half a dozen pins but they can be arranged in many
different ways.  Sometimes a PCB doesn't even even have a JTAG
connector, the JTAG pins can be spread out over the PCB or only
accessible as test points or at a component pad.  Sometimes JTAG is
hidden, either by covering it with a sticker or by having JTAG on a
piece of the PCB that is broken off from the main PCB after
manufacturing.

There was space on the SDS7102 for a 2mm 2x5 connector that looked
very promising though.  Probing it with a multimeter showed that the
five pins on one side were all connected to VCC or GND and the other
pins were connected to a couple of resistors.  If this was a JTAG port
four of the pins on the other side would be the mandatory pins and the
fifth probably a reset or not connected at all.  There is a list of
[JTAG connector pinouts](http://www.jtagtest.com/pinouts/) but it only
contains a fraction of all possible and used pinouts.  And
unfortunately none of the connector pinouts matched the one I'd found.

There is an interesting project called
[JTAGulator](http://www.grandideastudio.com/portfolio/jtagulator/)
which uses a custom built piece of hardware to test all pin
combinations by brute force.  There are also some interesting slides
and videos on that page with more details on how to discover JTAG
interfaces in a device.  I didn't have to do any of this though.  That
"tinhead" had already figured out the pinout and posted about it on
the [EEVblog
forums](http://www.eevblog.com/forum/testgear/review-of-owon-sds7102/msg64492/#msg64492).

The pinout of the connector is:

    RST 1    2  GND
    TMS 3    4  GND
    TDO 5    6  GND
    TDI 7    8  VCC
    TCK 9   10  VCC

I soldered some wires to both the JTAG port and the serial port.  I
then put the scope back together with the wires sticking out on the
side:

![Debug Connectors]({{site.baseurl}}/images/2016-05-06-sds7102-hacking-2/debug-connectors.jpg)

The three loose wires are transmit, receive and ground from the serial
port.  The big connector is compatible with a [Bus Blaster
MIPS](http://www.seeedstudio.com/depot/Bus-Blaster-V3c-for-MIPS-Kit-p-2258.html)
that I had lying around.

OpenOCD
=======

[OpenOCD](http://openocd.org/) is a tool to talk to debug interface on
many different chips.  Among other things it has support for the Bus
Blaster as a JTAG debug interface.  It does not have support for the
S3C2416 specifically, but it does have support for some other SoCs in
the Samsung S3C family and they ought to be fairly similar.

The documentation for OpenOCD is not all that good, but after a lot of
trial and error I had managed to piece together an "openocd.cfg" which
looks like this:

    source [find interface/ftdi/dp_busblaster.cfg]
    adapter_khz 1000
    reset_config srst_only srst_open_drain
    reset_config trst_and_srst

    jtag newtap s3c2416 cpu -irlen 4 -ircapture 0x1 -irmask 0xf -expected-id 0x07926f0f

    target create s3c2416.cpu arm920t -endian little -chain-position s3c2416.cpu

Running OpenOCD shows that it found something:

    $ openocd -f openocd.cfg
    ...
    Info : clock speed 1000 kHz
    Info : JTAG tap: s3c2416.cpu tap/device found: 0x07926f0f (mfg: 0x787 (<unknown>), part: 0x7926, ver: 0x0)
    Info : Embedded ICE version 6
    Info : s3c2416.cpu: hardware has 2 breakpoint/watchpoint units
    Info : accepting 'telnet' connection on tcp/4444

It's then possible to connect to OpenOCD and start doing things:

    $ telnet localhost 4444
    Trying 127.0.0.1...
    Connected to localhost.
    Escape character is '^]'.
    Open On-Chip Debugger
    > halt
    s3c2416.cpu: target state: halted
    target halted in ARM state due to debug-request, current mode: Supervisor
    cpsr: 0x40000013 pc: 0x33c04664
    MMU: disabled, D-Cache: disabled, I-Cache: disabled
    > step
    s3c2416.cpu: target state: halted
    target halted in ARM state due to single-step, current mode: Supervisor
    cpsr: 0x40000013 pc: 0x33c03990
    MMU: disabled, D-Cache: enabled, I-Cache: disabled

This halts the CPU and single steps one instruction.  According to the
memory map found in the S3C2416 data sheet DDR RAM is located at
0x30000000, so the address 0x33c04664 ought to be in DDR RAM.

I could now poke around and do things such as read and write the SoC
registers.  One quick test was to find the serial port transmit
register in the data sheet.  It's called UTXH0 and is at address
0x50000020.  I tried writing 0x55 (ASCII for "U") to that register:

    mww 0x50000020 0x55

"U" appared on the serial port.  Yes.  I knew how to print messages to
the serial port.

Dumping the NAND flash
======================

After reading the S3C2416 data sheet and comparing it to the data
sheets for some other SoCs in the same family it looked like it used
the same NAND flash controller as the S3C2412.  I added the following
line to openocd.cfg:

    nand device 0 s3c2412 s3c2416.cpu

Restart OpenOCD and try to probeing for a NAND memory.

    > nand probe 0
    NAND flash device 'NAND 128MiB 3.3V 8-bit (Samsung)' found

Lovely!

When the S3C2416 boots from flash it will load the first 8kBytes from
NAND flash to internal SRAM at 0x40000000.  So I tried dumping the
beginning of flash to a file:

    > nand dump 0 "first.bin" 0 8192

This wrote a file and the contents looked like ARM machine code.
Great.  Let's dump the whole flash.  But dumping 128MBytes of flash
with the JTAG interface running at 1MHz would be a bit slow so I tried
speeding up the JTAG clock a bit.  30Mhz did not work, but 20MHz did,
so I modified openocd.cfg for this:

    adapter_khz 20000

There are some other tricks one can do with an ARM CPU to speed things
up.  By letting OpenOCD steal a bit of RAM and download some ARM code
there it can run code on the CPU which speeds things up.  So I added a
few more lines to openocd.cfg to enable this (the work area is placed
at the end of DDR RAM: 0x30000000 + 64MByte - 1MByte = 0x33f00000).

    s3c2416.cpu configure -work-area-phys 0x33f00000 -work-area-size 0x20000 -work-area-backup 0
    arm7_9 fast_memory_access enable
    arm7_9 dcc_downloads enable

After this I told OpenOCD to get cracking:

    > nand dump 0 "flash.bin" 0 134217728

Even with the speedupts this would take some time, at least 10 hours
from a quick estimate, so I went home and planned to take a look at
the dump the next day.

But...

To avoid the risk of electrocution I had run the oscilloscope off
battery when I pulled it apart and forgot to plug the mains cable back
in afterwards.  When I looked at the scope the next day the battery
was flat and the dump had failed half way through.  Nothing to do,
just power on the scope, this time running from the mains, restart the
dump and wait another day.

Two days later I had a dump of the whole NAND flash.  This means that
if I mess anything up and corrupt the flash I ought be able to restore
the flash using the dump.  Hopefully.
