---
layout: post
title: An almost-GHz active differential oscilloscope probe (Part 2)
date: '2016-02-28T23:30:00.000+01:00'
tags:
- nerdy stuff
id: b598f572-c3ce-4240-bb3b-dfe0a41ecf81
---

In my last post I described how I had simulated and designed an active
scope probe and sent off the design to a PCB manufacturing house.  If
you haven't read [part
1]({{ site.baseurl }}/2016/02/26/ghz-differential-probe.html) yet
you might want to do that before continuing.

A week later the PCBs arrived in the mail.  That evening I assembled
the boards.  It didn't take long, there were only about a dozen
components to mount.

[![Assembled probe]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/2016-02-28-ghz-differential-probe-2/assembled-probe.jpg)]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/2016-02-28-ghz-differential-probe-2/assembled-probe.jpg)

I first needed something to probe.  Luckily enough I had a [Si5338
Evaluation
Board](https://www.silabs.com/products/clocksoscillators/clock-generator/Pages/Si5338-EVB.aspx)
lying around.  This board is powered and controlled from a USB port and
can output just about any clock frequency up to 350MHz and selected
frequencies up to 700MHz.

I connected one of the outputs from the clock board to through a SMA
"tee" connector directly to an input on my scope.  This way I could
see the clock signal from the source with as little distortion as
possible.  As you can see in this screenshot the clock is running at
25MHz and has an amplitude of about 1V peak-to-peak.

[![25MHz source signal]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/2016-02-28-ghz-differential-probe-2/source-25.png)]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/2016-02-28-ghz-differential-probe-2/source-25.png)

_Unnecessary details: My old Tektronix 11801B oscilloscope is a bit
clunky to use.  With the sampling heads I have I can't trigger
directly off the signal I'm looking at.  Instead I have to feed the
scope a separate trigger signal.  I did this by connecting a spare
output from the clock board to the trigger input and making sure that
the signal I was watching always was a multiple of the trigger
signal._

Anyway, I could then use a normal passive scope probe to probe the
signal at the "tee" connector.

[![Passive probing]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/2016-02-28-ghz-differential-probe-2/passive-probing.jpg)]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/2016-02-28-ghz-differential-probe-2/passive-probing.jpg)

The 11801B can't use passive probes anyway, the inputs are 50 Ohm only
and won't work with passive probes.  Instead I give you a screenshot
of my 100MHz Hameg scope with the passive probe above.  There's a lot
of overshoot, it's still possible to see that it is a 25MHz signal,
but quite frankly it looks like crap.

[![25MHz signal through a passive probe]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/2016-02-28-ghz-differential-probe-2/passive-25.png)]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/2016-02-28-ghz-differential-probe-2/passive-25.png)

A 1:10 passive probe with 10M立 resistance is perfect for probing slow
and weak signals, but the capacitance of such a probe is quite large,
this probe is specified to have 18pF input capacitance, and at high
frequencies this capacitance distorts the signal being probed a lot.
The ground wire of the probe is also fairly long which makes things
even worse.

The high capacitance of the passive probe also messes up the source
signal.  This is how the signal fed directly to the 11801B scope looks
when being probed.  The loading from the passive probe has really
slowed down the signal and changed the shape considerably.  And if
it's this bad at 25MHz, imagine what will happen at 500MHz.  This
could actually make some circuits stop working when they are probed.

[![25MHz source signal probed by passive probe]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/2016-02-28-ghz-differential-probe-2/source-passive-25.png)]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/2016-02-28-ghz-differential-probe-2/source-passive-25.png)

It was finally time to test my active probe.  The LMH6702 has an input
resistance of about 1.4M立 and an input capacitance of about 1.5pF and
unless the parasitic capacitances on the PCB ended up being very large
that should be the performance for the whole probe.  It means that the
probe would have a resistive load which is 7 times bigger than a
passive probe, but at high frequencies the capacitance dominates the
load and it ought to be at least 10 times lower.

In this screenshot the bright white trace is the signal that comes out
of the probe and the darker gray trace is the direct signal from the
source.

[![25MHz signal probed by active probe]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/2016-02-28-ghz-differential-probe-2/active-25.png)]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/2016-02-28-ghz-differential-probe-2/active-25.png)

The source signal has barely changed compared to not being probed.  At
25MHz the active probe doesn't seem to load the signal being probed at
all.  The output from the probe was slower, the almost vertical edges
from the source have become a soft slope.  But it's still a lot better
than what I got with the passive probe.

The gain for the probe was supposed to be 1:10, so the output from the
probe should have had an amplitude of
1V&nbsp;/&nbsp;10&nbsp;=&nbsp;100mV, but I didn't have any 1.1k立
resistors for the gain of the second stage and ended up using 1.2k立
resistors instead.  The attenuation ended up being 220/1200/2 or 1:11
and the amplitude about 90mV.

At 100MHz the bandwidth limits of the active probe starts showing a
bit.  It's possible to see the rough shape of the source signal in the
output from the probe but most of the details have been lost.  Also
note that there is a constant delay of about 2.3ns, the time it takes
for the signal to pass through the OP-amps.

[![100MHz signal probed by active probe]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/2016-02-28-ghz-differential-probe-2/active-100.png)]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/2016-02-28-ghz-differential-probe-2/active-100.png)

This was actually pretty close to what was predicted by the
simulation.  Note that in the simulation the input signal is
+/-1V&nbsp;=&nbsp;2V peak-to-peak and the source signal above is 1V
peak-to-peak so all amplitudes in the simulation are twice as large.

[![Transient simulation of a 100MHz signal]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/2016-02-26-ghz-differential-probe/simulation-100.png)]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/2016-02-26-ghz-differential-probe/simulation-100.png)

At 200MHz all that was left was a triangle wave and the amplitude out
from the probe was markedly lower.  This is to be expected as the gain
of the probe decreases at higher frequencies.

[![200MHz signal probed by active probe]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/2016-02-28-ghz-differential-probe-2/active-200.png)]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/2016-02-28-ghz-differential-probe-2/active-200.png)

At 400MHz the amplitude was less than half of the source signal.  By
the way, don't trust the Rise/Fall measurements the the bottom of the
screen, they are quite noisy and jumped around a lot.

[![400MHz signal probed by active probe]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/2016-02-28-ghz-differential-probe-2/active-400.png)]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/2016-02-28-ghz-differential-probe-2/active-400.png)

Unfortunately the Si5338 clock generator was unable to output a 500MHz
signal so I couldn't make any direct comparison to the simulation
at 500MHz.  Instead I cranked the clock generator up to 700MHz, which
is almost as high as it can go.  The amplitude has halved again.

[![700MHz signal probed by active probe]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/2016-02-28-ghz-differential-probe-2/active-700.png)]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/2016-02-28-ghz-differential-probe-2/active-700.png)

To get an idea of how much the active probe loaded the source signal
at 700MHz I made two measurements and overlaid them on each other.
The gray trace is the signal without the probe and the white trace is
with the probe.  The probe does load the source signal a little bit,
it's possible to tell that the rise time and peak amplitude is
slightly slower.  It's actually pretty good though, it's within 10%
and would probably not make any difference and allow most circuits to
keep working even when probed.

[![700MHz loading by active probe]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/2016-02-28-ghz-differential-probe-2/loading-700.png)]({{ site.baseurl }}/images/2016-02-28-ghz-differential-probe-2/loading-700.png)

The bandwidth of a device is usually defined as the frequency at which
the gain has dropped by 3dB compared to baseline.  [Decibel (dB) is a
logarithmic unit](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Decibel) and -3dB
corresponds almost exactly to half the amplitude.  For my active prove
this happened somewhere between 200MHz and 400MHz and probably closer
to 200MHz than to 400MHz.

This is far from the 1 GHz bandwidth I would have liked but the probe
is definitely very useful anyway.  At 500MHz the absolute amplitude is
off, but that doesn't matter that much, I'm usually more interested in
seeing the frequency and if there is any jitter on the signal.

At this point I was rather happy.  I'm a programmer, not hardware
engineer and don't quite know what I am doing when designing analog
hardware.  I was slightly surprised that the probe worked at all and
was very surprised that it was so stable and useful all the way up to
700MHz.

Good enough for an evening playing around with a soldering iron and
then doing measurements with a scope.  It was time to call it a night.

