---
layout: post
title: Linux on the SDS7102 Scope
tags:
- nerdy stuff
id: 481c352f-e120-4ffb-b80c-68bcca93620b
---

This is a post about me trying to get Linux to run on my OWON SDS7012
oscilloscope.  In [the
previous]({{site.baseurl}}/2016/05/06/sds7102-hacking-2.html) I had
managed to talk to the CPU in the SDS7102 scope using JTAG and dump
the NAND flash contents to a file.  But what else can one do with
JTAG?

Dumping Registers
=================

I put together a small script for OpenOCD which dumps the contents of
all the SoC registers over JTAG.  As an example, the following OpenOCD
commands will dump the configuration for GPIO port C:

    > mdw phys 0x56000020
    0x56000020: aaaa56aa
    > mdw phys 0x56000024
    0x56000024: 0000000c
    > mdw phys 0x56000028
    0x56000028: ffffffff

It's possible to discover a lot by just looking at the registers.  The
registers together with the data sheet for the S3C2416 allowed me to
figure out how a lot of the hardware is configured.

0x56000020 is the GPIO Port C Control Register (GPCCON) which decides
how each pin is configured.  Each pin in this register uses two bits,
00 means that it is an input, 01 means that it is an output and 10
means that the pin has a special function.  We can see that 5, 6 and 7
are outputs and all other pins are special functions.  For port C that
means they are used for video.  0x56000024 (GPCDAT) shows the current
state of the pins in the port, and 0x56000028 (GPCUDP) controls if
there should be a pull up or pull down on each pin.

Here's my notes for port C based on this:

    GPC0    2 LEND      Video Line End
    GPC1    2 VCLK      Video Clock
    GPC2    2 HSYNC     Video Horizontal Sync
    GPC3    2 VSYNC     Video Vertical Sync
    GPC4    2 VDEN      Video Data Enable
    GPC5    1 Output
    GPC6    1 Output
    GPC7    1 Output
    GPC8:15 2 VD[0:7]   Video Data[0:7]

Most of GPIO Port C and D are configured as a LCD interface and by
also dumping the display controller registers I could read out the LCD
configuration: length of sync pulses, video clock speed and so on.

Port A is similar:

    > mdw phys 0x56000000
    0x56000000: 0f7f6f5c
    > mdw phys 0x56000004
    0x56000004: 00010003
    > mdw phys 0x56000008
    0x56000008: 00000000

Here each pin uses one bit in 0x56000000 (GPACON).  0 means that it is
an output, 1 means that it is special function.

    GPA0    0 Output
    GPA1    0 Output    Something clicks when changed
    GPA2    1 RADDR17
    GPA3    1 RADDR18
    GPA4    1 RADDR19
    GPA5    0 Output
    GPA6    1 RADDR20
    GPA7    0 Output
    GPA8    1 RADDR23
    GPA9    1 RADDR24
    GPA10   1 RADDR25
    GPA11   1 Reserved
    GPA12   0 Output    Something clicks when changed
    GPA13   1 nRCS[2]
    GPA14   1 nRCS[3]
    GPA15   0 Output
    GPA16   1 nRCS[5]
    GPA17   1 CLE       NAND Command Latch Enable
    GPA18   1 ALE       NAND Address Latch Enable
    GPA19   1 nFWE      NAND /Write Enable
    GPA20   1 nFRE      NAND /Read Enable
    GPA21   1 nRSTOUT   NAND /Reset
    GPA22   1 nFCE      NAND /Chip Enable (maybe, could also be nRCSx)
    GPA23   0 Output
    GPA24   1 nRSMAVD
    GPA25   1 DQM[2]    Strange, SDRAM is only 16 bits wide
    GPA26   1 DQM[3]    Strange, SDRAM is only 16 bits wide
    GPA27   1 Reserved

GPA17..22 are signals used by the NAND flash controller which is very
reasonable since there is a NAND flash on the PCB.  Some pins such as
GPA25/26 are configured as special functions but the configuration
does not make sense.  DQM2/3 should only be used with SDRAM which is
32 bits wide and the Hynix SDRAM is only 16 bits wide.  This might the
default reset configuration which hasn't been changed or maybe
settings left in the code from some earlier platform.

For pins which are configured as outputs, changing them can be
illuminating.  Toggling GPA1 or GPA12 make something click inside the
scope, these pins probably control the relays in the Analog Front End
(AFE).  These two pins are nice because they make a sound when they
change, other pins have to be probed with a scope to see what they do.

Linux
=====

And that's actually everything that's necessary to port Linux to the
scope.  When I had the register information it only took me about
three evenings to get Linux running on the scope with a serial console
and a busybox shell.

Linux already has support for the S3C2416 and most of the devices
built into the SoC.  I won't go into all the details but it was
basically a matter of taking the values from the register dump and
plugging them into to the existing drivers.

It was a bit of a bumpy ride though.

I first tried using device tree to configure all the hardware
supported by the kernel.  It did not work.  The device tree very was
immature when support for the S3C2416 SoC was added to the kernel.
After wasting about a day on it I found out that the device tree
support for S3C2416 was never finished, most importantly the
infrastructure for both clocks and interrupts is broken in the
mainline kernel.  After I realized this I went back to the old way of
adding support for a platform in the Linux kernel using a machine
file.  I redid all my hardware configuration by hacking it into the
mach-smdk2416 file, which is the configuration for the Samsung
reference platform for the S3C2416, and suddenly things started
working.

I also had a lot of problems with OpenOCD.  When booting the Linux
kernel, the MMU and all caches must be turned off.  It's supposed to
be possible to do this using the "mcr" commands in OpenOCD but I never
got this to work, and by the time I had managed to start OpenOCD,
connect to it and type "halt" the bootloader in the scope would have
set up the MMU and enabled the caches.

But if I halt the bootloader quickly enough after the scope has
powered on, the first stage bootloader will have configured the DDR
memory controller but not had time to turn on the MMU yet.  Powering
on the scope with one and and hitting enter on the following command
line with the other hand I'm able to do just that:

    /opt/openocd/bin/openocd -f openocd.cfg -c init -c halt

If I time this correctly the bootloader is in a tight loop filling the
DDR with zeros and is ready to run my code.

I used [Buildroot](https://buildroot.org/) to build a compressed Linux
image with an initial ramdisk containing busybox so that I would have
a shell I could use and a hardcoded kernel command.  This is a nice
self-contained package in one file, a zImage, that can be downloaded
using JTAG and which basically only needs the CPU and SDRAM to be
configured to run.  I told the Linux kernel to use the first serial
port, UART0, for debug messages.  I also hacked the startup code in
the kernel to set up the some registers required by the kernel.

To boot the kernel, connect to OpenOCD.  Just to be safe, write to the
interrupt controller registers to disable all interrupts.  Then load
the zImage into SDRAM and run it:

    mww 0x4a000008 0xffffffff
    mww 0x4a000048 0xffffffff
    mww 0x4a00001c 0xffffffff

    load_image zImage 0x31000000 bin
    resume 0x31000000

It was very satisfying to see the Linux kernel start to boot:

    Uncompressing Linux... done, booting the kernel.
    Booting Linux on physical CPU 0x0
    Linux version 3.12.0-rc7+ (wingel@zoo) (gcc version 4.7.3 (Buildroot 2013.11-00004-g020dda7) ) #8 Mon Apr 26 21:14:24 CEST 2016
    CPU: ARM926EJ-S [41069265] revision 5 (ARMv5TEJ), cr=00053177
    CPU: VIVT data cache, VIVT instruction cache
    Machine: SMDK2416
    Memory policy: ECC disabled, Data cache writeback
    CPU S3C2416/S3C2450 (id 0x32450003)

Of course, it didn't get that far at first.  This was using device
tree and since it never got any timer interrupts it didn't make it
past "Calibrating delay loop...".  But a day later, after figuring out
that I shouldn't use device tree, I had a Linux booting all the way to
a shell on a serial console.

Device Drivers
==============

After that I brought up one device driver after another.  Since I had
all the configuration needed for the LCD display it was the first
thing I did.  It was really just a matter of taking the values and
plugging them into the mach-smdk2410 file:

    static struct s3c_fb_pd_win smdk2416_fb_win[] = {
	    [0] = {
		    .default_bpp    = 16,
		    .max_bpp        = 32,
		    .xres           = 800,
		    .yres           = 600,
	    },
    };

    static struct fb_videomode smdk2416_lcd_timing = {
	    .pixclock       = 35045,
	    .left_margin    = 0x2e,
	    .right_margin   = 0x96,
	    .upper_margin   = 0x0e,
	    .lower_margin   = 0x0c,
	    .hsync_len      = 0x01,
	    .vsync_len      = 0x0a,
	    .xres           = 800,  /* 0x320 */
	    .yres           = 600,  /* 0x258 */
    };

The pixel clock needed a bit of calculating backwards from the
register value and resolution, but it wasn't hard at all.

The USB host didn't require any configuration at all, it just worked.
Plugging in a USB mouse worked nicely.  Plugging in or unplugging a
USB hard drive hung the kernel, but I actually think this is an
electrical problem because I realised that don't even have to plug in
the hard drive, it's enough to touch the shield of the USB plug to the
USB connector to hang the kernel.  I really ought to figure out what's
happening here, but its good enough for now.

The USB device was a bit trickier.  Linux assumes that the clock from
one of the clock outputs on the CPU is fed back as the USB clock and
that it is running at 48MHz.  All this is hardcoded in the drivers.
The SDS7102 does it differently and is actually using a configuration
that is invalid according to the data sheet.  When I finally figured
this out I hacked it into the driver and it started working.

The NAND flash just worked.  The only hard part was figuring out the
syntax of the mtdpart argument to the Linux kernel command line.  I
could then use the "nanddump" tool to dump the contents of the NAND
flash from Linux and see that it matched the NAND dump I had made
using OpenOCD before.

All these were fairly easy.  All these devices are built into the CPU
and all the necessary information about how to configure them was
there in the registers.

The ethernet controller is an external chip and took quite a bit
longer to make work.  I had to disassemble the scope firmware to
figure that one out.  Afterwards I realised that it's connected almost
identically to how ethernet is done on the SMDK2416, it's using the
same pins for the SPI bus and the same chip select pin, the only thing
that differs is the interrupt line it's connected to.  I could have
saved myself a lot of effort if I had just thought to check the
SMDK2416 schematics before.  Mea culpa.

Right now ethernet is fairly slow, I couldn't get the high speed SPI
controller to work properly so I cheated by configuring the SPI port
pins as GPIOs and are using the bitbanging SPI driver in the kernel
instead.  I still get about 1MBit transfer rate over ethernet which is
not too bad, but the chip supports 100MBit ethernet and a 40MHz SPI
clock to the host so it ought to be possible to get a transfer rate
close to that.

At this point the scope is a fully functioning Linux system with a
working display, USB host, USB device, NAND flash and ethernet.  Not
bad for for a few evenings playing around with it:

![Scope]({{site.baseurl}}/images/2016-05-07-linux-on-sds7102/display.jpg)

If I wanted to it should be possible to write a custom bootloader for
the S3C2416 and make Linux boot from flash.

I'm also cheating a bit because I'm skipping the part where I reverse
engineered the file system to get the files needed to disassemble the
firmware to get ethernet to work.  I ought to have been able to get
ethernet to work without the disassembly but having it made it easier.

I might write a bit about all that next time.  Or maybe something
completely different.
