---
layout: post
title: Finding SDS7102 FPGA pins
tags:
- nerdy stuff
- sds7102
- fpga
- myhdl
- rhea
excerpt:
  A series of posts about reverse engineering the OWON SDS7102 oscilloscope.
  <br>
  This post talks about using the FPGA itself to find out how the pins on
  the FPGA are connected.
id: e52038be-e1c0-43dd-b357-7b6e6e3bec84
---

This is a post in a series about me poking at the insides of my OWON
SDS7012 oscilloscope.  You might want to start reading at the
[beginning]({{site.baseurl}}/2016/05/01/sds7102-hacking.html).

In my [last
post]({{site.baseurl}}/2016/05/28/sds7102-gio-pins.html)
I used a trick where I configured all unknown GPIO pins as inputs and
wrote a device driver to detect if the pins changed.  This worked so
well that I decided to do the same thing using the FPGA in the scope.

The FPGA in the SDS7102 scope is a Xilinx Spartan 6 XC6SLX9.

![The FPGA on the SDS7120]({{site.baseurl}}/images/2016-05-29-sds7102-fpga-pins/fpga.jpg)

It has an integrated memory controller on bank 3 which physically
located at the top of the FPGA in the image above.  This memory
controller is hopefuly connected to the Hynix DDR2 memory just above
the FPGA.  Bank 2 is on the left side of the FPGA and is probably
connected to the SoC via the resistors to the left of the FPGA.  Bank
1 is on the bottom and it's possible to see a lot of differential
traces heading downwards towards the ADC (which is nos in the
picture).  Bank 0 is on the right and there is nothing obvious that it
is connected to.  But that's the whole point of reverse engineering,
to find things out, isn't it?

FPGA programming
================

A FPGA is a piece of programmable logic.  Depending on how you look at
it, a FPGA is either totally different from programming, it's
reconfigurable hardware, or a FPGA just another programming language,
albeit very different from most normal programming languages.

It is possible to configure an FPGA at the gate level, defining
combinatoric logic with AND, OR, XOR gates, inverters, latches and
flip-flops.  It's much more common to use a hardware description (HDL)
language such as [Verilog](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Verilog) or
[VHDL](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/VHDL).  These languages are often
called [register-transfer
level](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Register-transfer_level) (RTL)
since they use an abstraction of transfers of signals between
registers and logical operations on the signals.

I did play around a bit with Verilog a few years ago but have never
really come to terms with the language.  As a "softie", someone who
comes from the software side, Verilog feels very primitive.  The
Verilog syntax is a bit inspired by C but it's even more low level
than C if you can believe that.  For example, Verilog doesn't even
have anything like a struct.  Try to imagine programming C without the
ability to collect related variables in a struct, and having to pass
each member as a separate argument to a function.  It's not uncommon
to have Verilog modules with tens or even hundreds of signals as
arguments.

You can combine multiple signals into one big bit vector, but it's a
bit like having to pack a structure into an integer array by hand so
that it can be passed through a C function interface, and then having
to unpack it by hand again.  Rather painful I'd say.

Systemverilog, an extension of plain Verilog, is supposed to solve all
of this, but many vendor tools such as Xilinx ISE (the free tool from
Xilinx that works with the Spartan 6 series of FPGAs) do not support
Systemverilog.  VHDL is more complete, it does have "entity" which are
interfaces somewhat similar to C structs.  The only problem is that I do
not get along with VHDL at all.  The syntax seems to be inspired by
ADA and, well, I just don't like it.

Because Verilog is so a primitive, people have built lots of tools to
automatically generate Verilog from other languages.  A few years ago
I found something called [MyHDL](http://myhdl.org/) which uses the
Python language to generate Verilog or VHDL which looked very
interesting and I've been meaning to try it out ever since.

I like Python, I even ported [Python 1.2 to VMS over 20 years
ago](https://www.python.org/ftp/python/vms/).  Damn, that's scary, am
I really getting that old?  Anyway, where was I?  I like Python and
being able to program an FPGA in Python sounds really nice.  This
seems like a a perfect opportunity to learn MyHDL.

I also found something called [Rhea](https://github.com/cfelton/rhea).
It is a set of useful libraries for MyHDL and it also contains some
very nice build scripts for many different FPGAs.

Lots of new toys to play around with and learn.

Hello World
===========

The FPGA is configured by the SoC using five GPIO pins.  Three of
those pins on the FPGA can be used as general I/O after the
configuration is done.  The first thing I wrote was the FPGA version
of *Hello World*, a small piece of MyHDL that just toggles one of
those I/O pins every second.  I used the STARTUP_SPARTAN6 primitive to
activate the internal 50MHz configuration clock in the Spartan 6 which
then clocks a counter which toggles the I/O pin every time it wraps
around.  I built an FPGA image using the Rhea build system and then
used my FPGA device driver to configure the FPGA and load the image.

After loading the image I could use the Linux device driver I wrote
last time and see that the pin changed.  The FPGA was alive at least.

Reading FPGA I/O pins
=====================

The next step was to configure all the I/O pins on the FPGA as inputs
with a pull up and then write some MyHDL code which used the three
free pins from the configuration interface to do something more
advanced.  One pin was turned into a LOAD signal, when that pin
changed from low to high (on the positive edge) it would load the
state of all 180 or so input pins into a register.  Using a second pin
as a CLOCK driven from the SoC and the third pin as a DATA OUTPUT from
the FPGA, I could then shift out the data from the FPGA registers to
the SoC, one bit at a time.  I ran a simulation using MyHDL and looked
at the signals using [GtkWave](http://gtkwave.sourceforge.net/) to see
that my code actually did what is was supposed to.

This way I could in theory do the same kind of tests as I had done
with the device driver on the SoC, and see the state of each pin
configured as an input on the FPGA.  This didn't work as well as for
the SoC though, a lot of pins were changing all the time and I didn't
quite know where too start looking.  It also turned out that the pull
ups on the FPGA pins made the system unstable, Linux would often crash
shortly after configuring the FPGA with my FPGA image.  Removing the
pull ups made the system stable again.  Strange, I need to think about
that.

Counting edges
==============

My next attempt was to add a counter for each pin that would count the
number of times the state of the pin had changed from low to high.
With a 32 bit register that would be read every second I should be
able to count up to 4 billion changes per second.  More than enough
since a Spartan 6 FPGA is hard to clock much faster than about 400MHz.
And since my counters use the internal 50MHz clock to sample the
signal it wouldn't be able to count faster than that anyway.  I
couldn't fit counters for all 180 pins into the FPGA so I had to limit
the image to only sample pins on one bank at a time.  It sort of
worked, some pins would have a count of 0 meaning that they were not
changing, one pin changed about 50 times per second but a lot of pins
seemed to change as fast as the counter could count and would jump
wildly between different values.  I wasn't quite sure if my HDL code
was working or if the results were just a lot of glitches.  The
signals had looked OK in simulation, but I wasn't sure if my test
cases actually covered all the things that would happen in reality.

I did come up with one trick to verify that the counters would work at
low speed. I started counting the number of pulses on the clock signal
that was used to shift out data.  With 55 counters to read, each 32
bits, I should see 55&nbsp;*&nbsp;32&nbsp;=&nbsp;1760 edges on the
clock line for every time I shift out the contents of the counters.
But there were usually a few extra edges, the counter would show 1765
or so.  Hmm, that's not quite right.

As a programmer it's easy to think of digital signals as being
digital, a signal is always high or low.  That is not true.  In
reality all signals are analog signals.  When a signal changes from 0V
to 3.3V this takes time; if the signal is sampled just when it is
changing it might be at any intermediate voltage in between.  This is
a well [known
problem](http://www.eetimes.com/document.asp?doc_id=1276114) which is
called
[metastability](http://www.asic-world.com/tidbits/metastablity.html).

The fix is fairly easy though.  Add another flip flop which samples
the output from the first flip flop.  This gives the output from the
first flip-flop time to settle and reduces the risk of metastability.
It won't eliminate the problem completely, but it will reduce the risk
to such levels that in practice it will never happen.  With this fix I
did see exactly 1760 edges for the counter of the clock signal, but a
lot of other counters were still jumping around wildly.

Asynchronous counters
=====================

What if the inputs to the pins are changing faster than the 50MHz
clock I'm using to sample them?  That could really give some strange
results, couldn't it?  I rewrote my counters one more time so that
instead of sampling the signals on the pins the counters would be
clocked by the signals on the pins.  The Xilinx tools complained about
this, it's bad practice to use signals from pins that aren't dedicated
clock pins as clocks.  I had to read up on how to tell the Xilinx
tools "shut up, I know what I'm doing" to let me do that.  I don't
really know what I'm doing, but well, it did let me synthesize an
image that I could load into the FPGA.

Making the counters asynchronous to the internal clock of the FPGA has
its own problems.  Trying to read a binary counter using a different
clock than the counter is clocked risks both metastability or just the
risk that the bits in the counter won't update at exactly the same
time.  A binary counter which is incrementing from 01 to 10 might have
finished changing the low bit from 1 to 0 while the high bit is still
changing from 0 to 1.  To the reader it would appear as if the counter
is 00 and has just counted backwards.  Which of course happened.  This
is also a well known issue, [clock domain
crossing](http://www.eetimes.com/document.asp?doc_id=1276114) is a
generic term describing the issues when working with signals coming
from two different clock sources (domains).

There are also [known
techniques](http://www.edn.com/electronics-blogs/day-in-the-life-of-a-chip-designer/4435339/Synchronizer-techniques-for-multi-clock-domain-SoCs)
for transferring signals between clock domains.  One such technique is
a [Gray code](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gray_code) where a change
of +1 or -1 will only see one bit of the value change and thus avoids
the issue with binary counters where multiple bits can change at one
time.  I added a gray encoder to my counters which converted the value
into gray code which was then loaded into the shift register and
transferred to the SoC where the gray code was decoded.  No more
counters that count backwards.

Optimization
============

I spent the evenings for about one week learning more about MyHDL and
optimizing and refining my counters.  I wanted to be able to count
edges on all pins at the same time but to do that I had to reduce
amount of logic needed to do the counting.  I found out that I could
fit 180 counters into the FPGA if I removed the extra registers used
for gray encoding and reduced the counter size to 10 bits.  But 10
bits can only count up to 1023 and if the frequency on a pin is 1MHz
that means that the counter will wrap around in one millisecond, much
faster than I could read the counters from the SoC.

What I finally ended up with was a hybrid counter design where I have
180 counters that are 10 bits wide.  Each counter is clocked by the
signal from its pin and counts directly in gray code.  A counter which
counts directly in gray code is not possible to clock as fast as a
counter counting in binary, but it uses less FPGA resources (actually,
I have to check this, it might not be true).

Since the 10 bit counters can wrap around rather quickly I added a
periodic task in the FPGA which loops over each 10 bit gray counter
and updates a 32 bit counter in block RAM if the 10 bit counter has
wrapped around.  With 180 counters counting to 1023 being sampled by a
50MHz clock it should be possible to measure signals with a maximum
frequency of 1024&nbsp;*&nbsp;50&nbsp;/&nbsp;180&nbsp;=&nbsp;284MHz on
each pin, as long as the gray counters can keep up of course.

Results
=======

The results of all this work is this, a chart with the number of
positive edges seen on each pin and the current state of the pin:

      0  C4       0 ^  A4       0 ^  B5       0 ^  A5       0 ^  D5       0 ^
      5  C5       0 ^  B6       0 ^  A6       0 ^  F7       0 ^  E6   17.3k ^
     10  C7       0 ^  A7       0 ^  D6       0 ^  C6       0 ^  B8       0 ^
     15  A8       0 ^  C9       0 ^  A9       0 ^  B10      0 v  A10      0 ^
     20  E7  126.7M v  E8  126.7M v  E10      0 ^  C10  10.0M v  D8       0 v
     25  C8       0 ^  C11      0 ^  A11      0 v  F9       0 v  D9       0 v
     30  B12      0 v  A12      0 ^  C13      0 v  A13      0 ^  F10      0 v
     35  E11      0 ^  B14      0 ^  A14      0 v  D11      0 v  D12      0 ^
     40  E13      0 v  E12      0 ^  B15      0 v  B16      0 ^  F12      0 ^
     45  G11      0 v  D14      0 ^  D16      0 v  F13      0 ^  F14      0 v
     50  C15      0 v  C16      0 ^  E15      0 v  E16      0 ^  F15      0 v
     55  F16      0 ^  G14      0 v  G16      0 ^  H15      0 ^  H16      0 v
     60  G12      0 ^  H11      0 v  H13      0 v  H14      0 ^  J11      0 v
     65  J12      0 ^  J13      0 v  K14      0 ^  K12      0 v  K11      0 ^
     70  J14      0 v  J16      0 ^  K15      0 v  K16      0 ^  N14      0 ^
     75  N16      0 v  M15      0 v  M16      0 ^  L14      0 ^  L16      0 v
     80  P15      0 v  P16      0 ^  R15      0 v  R16      0 ^  R14      0 v
     85  T15      0 ^  T14      0 ^  T13      0 v  R12  17.3k ^  T12      0 ^
     90  L12      0 v  L13      0 ^  M13      0 v  M14      0 ^  T11      0 ^
     95  M12   1.8M v  M11 722.9k v  T10 210.2k ^  N12 104.0k v  P12 977.8k ^
    100  N11      0 ^  P11 210.2k ^  N9    3.4M ^  P9  719.6k v  L10 976.7k ^
    105  M10      0 ^  R9   13.8M ^  T9   27.3M v  M9  545.1k v  N8  694.1k v
    110  P8  807.9k ^  T8  494.4k ^  P7  133.3M ^  M7  133.3M ^  R7  180.8k ^
    115  T7  713.9k v  P6  458.5k ^  T6  828.5k v  R5    2.0M v  T5       0 ^
    120  N5    1.1M ^  P5    1.9M v  L8  959.5k ^  L7    1.1M v  P4  647.2k v
    125  T4    1.2M v  M6   27.3M v  N6    1.6M v  T3    1.1M v  M4  996.0k v
    130  M3       0 ^  M5    2.0M v  N4    1.8M v  R2       0 v  R1       0 v
    135  P2       0 v  P1       0 v  N3       0 v  N1       0 v  M2       0 v
    140  M1       0 v  L3       0 v  L1       0 v  K2       0 v  K1       0 v
    145  J3       0 v  J1       0 v  H2       0 v  H1       0 v  G3       0 v
    150  G1       0 v  F2       0 v  F1       0 v  K3       0 v  J4       0 v
    155  J6       0 v  H5       0 v  H4       0 v  H3       0 v  L4       0 v
    160  L5       0 v  E2       0 v  E1       0 v  K5       0 v  K6       0 v
    165  C3       0 v  C2       0 v  D3       0 v  D1       0 v  C1       0 v
    170  B1  128.4k ^  G6       0 v  G5       0 v  B2       0 v  A2       0 v
    175  F4    6.8M ^  F3       0 v  E4  971.0k ^  E3       0 v  F6  115.4k v
    180  F5    1.0M v  B3  972.3k ^  A3       0 ^

Whoa.  There's a lot of things happening all the time, even with the
FPGA doing nothing.  There are a few interesting things in there.

Pin C10 at the line starting with 20 is toggling 10 million times per
second.  With a bit of luck that is the 10MHz reference clock from the
crystal oscillator (U98).

Pins E7 and E8 are both toggling at 126MHz.  According to the FPGA
data sheet, those pins make up a differential pair and are also a
global clock input to the FPGA.  This ought to be a differential clock
signal from some other part of the scope.

Pins M7 and R7 make up another differential clock input on the FPGA
and is toggling at 133MHz.  Hmm, these signals are in bank 2 together
with a lot of other signals that are changing all the time.

Nasty surprises
===============

Where have I seen 133MHz before?  In the output from the Linux kernel
when it is reporting the clock frequencies it is using:

    CPU: MPLL on 800.000 MHz, cpu 400.000 MHz, mem 133.333 MHz

What!?  You must be \*beep\* kidding me.  What the \*beep\* were the
OWON engineers smoking when they thought that this would be a good
idea?

They are using the DDR memory bus as the high speed bus between the
SoC and the FPGA.  They must have programmed the FPGA to simulate a
DDR2 memory.  Seriously folks.  There is a perfectly usable bus on the
SoC which is connected to the NAND flash which is designed to be used
as an expansion bus.  The expansion bus even supports DMA so that a
device on the bus can transfer data directly into RAM on the SoC
without even involving the CPU.  Why on earth would someone do
something as silly as use the DDR memory bus as an expansion bus?  But
apparently they have, and all those pins changing in bank 2 and bank 3
are the pins from the DDR memory bus.  That also explains why enabling
the pull ups on the FPGA would crash Linux running on the SoC, doing
that messes with the DDR signal integrity and corrupts data in memory.

Ungh.  This is going to be a lot harder than I expected.

I'm pretty new to HDL and programming FPGAs.  I think my HDL skills
should be up to writing an interface that works with the expansion bus
of the Samsung SoC; it's a fairly slow and simple bus.  To work with
the DDR bus memory, with tight timing and signals coming in on both
edges of the clock (that's what DDR means, dual data rate, data is
transferred on both clock cycles) is a lot harder.  I feel a bit out
of my depth.  This is a bit of a showstopper for me.

I think I'll push on with the reverse engineering anyway.  I'm doing
this for fun and the challenge and it's kind of interesting to see how
everything fits together.  It should still be possible to get
everything else to work and be able to sample a waveform and very
slowly transfer it to the SoC using the three pins from the
configuration interface.  It won't be usable as a proper scope, but
it'll still be interesting as a proof of concept.

Or maybe someone else who is more experienced than me at FPGA
programming might be able to do something with the DDR memory
interface.  Nudge, nudge.

We'll see what happens.

Update: [This series is continued here]({{site.baseurl}}/2016/06/19/sds7102-more-fpga-pins.html).